[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I don't think
there is a person among us who
has not sunk into either anger
or despair over the unfairness
regarding bailouts
of the big banks
while the citizens are
left paying the bill.
As our guest today, who goes
by the name of Citizen Zeus,
our global economic
system has given itself
over to nothing short
of outright lawlessness.
But how did we get
here, and what will it
take to reestablish
value, true value,
in democratic capitalism?
Zeus, I have to say, you're
an incredibly clear thinker.
>>CITIZEN ZEUS: Thank you.
>>REGINA: The points
that you've made in this
really inspire a person to
want to do the right thing,
even though to do
the right thing
has short-term sacrifices.
And in terms of our
economy, I mean,
everyone can see
the flaws in that,
but there isn't
economy without people.
We're driving the economy,
either by our complacency,
which is a passive buy-in,
or by conscious choices,
because of the illusions set
forth by media and so forth as
to what a prosperous life is.
And I think you've
done a beautiful job
of delineating this.
And we're going to go
into as many points
as-- were talking off camera.
This could be a
three-hour conversation,
so we're going to
reduce it down.
But first of all, you're a
philosopher of education.
How did this extend over
into such a deep analysis
of how the economy
works and should work?
>>ZEUS: Well, my background
in philosophy of education
was within an interdisciplinary,
sort of interdepartmental sort
of study and involved history,
philosophy, psychology,
anthropology, sociology.
So what happens when
you begin to bring
these different lenses
of study together
is you start noticing that they
all reference phenomena, what
might seem like
separate phenomena,
like for instance
with the economy.
You know, I can't pay the rent.
Or why haven't we had a
minimum wage raise in, like,
10 to 15 years?
You start to see in
the process of going
from these different
lenses that it's not just
this one instance, that there's
a larger, underlying issue
happening here.
And that's the start to a
deeper and larger investigation.
Now I did that with self-esteem.
My dissertation
was on self-esteem
and developing an interpersonal
notion of self and self-esteem.
And I noticed in
self-esteem that it
was either very task
oriented and individualistic,
or there was this sort of
emphasis on global self-esteem
or in some sense also
self-esteem in relationship,
but usually just in
terms of dating well
or doing something like this.
What I thought was
instead of having
an individualistic notion, we
learn and develop true worth
in these really meaningful,
supportive relationships.
I can have all kinds of ideas
in my head about who I am
and what I'm worth, but
if it has no reference,
it's not gonna matter.
>>REGINA: It has to be in
relationship to something.
>>ZEUS: Absolutely,
and the economy
is very similar to that.
I noticed, looking
at the economy,
we have a very, very
balkanized or fragmented,
individualistic
notion of what it
means to be a participant
in the economy.
You know, we are consumers.
What is my salary?
What is my education?
And it just goes
on and on and on.
>>REGINA: We compete.
>>ZEUS: Right, and
even the family,
which is one of the big
units for the economy,
is seen as a kind of
abstract, isolated thing
in and of itself.
You know, what are you going
to get for your family?
These big sports
stars have said,
I have to work for my family.
But it's like, no, you're not.
These are extensions of you.
You have $32 million.
It's not about your
family at this point.
So what's happened is that
we have a notion of economy
really built around
the self, the ego,
largely, very much in the same
way that self-esteem had that.
And I started to begin
to notice similarities
between my work with
learning and education
and the way in which the economy
is understood and enacted
in our society.
And add that with my
background from all
these different disciplines,
and all of a sudden
I started to put
the pieces together.
And it just started
to build on itself.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
did a beautiful job.
I'm really torn because you
have these short papers which
are kind of to be used
for really talking points
for community
gatherings and such,
and really beautifully
done to bring
especially small communities
together that are frustrated.
The infrastructure
doesn't work for them,
where people have to
start coming together.
And I see this everywhere,
so I can see this
as a guideline for the starting
of a new kind of community
relationship between people
and even institutional entities
if they'll participate.
So we're going to
refer to these.
Even though I have,
like, pages and pages
of questions I've
already written,
I'm so impressed with this.
So let's start out
with one question
before we go to this, which
is "The 10 shocking practices
in the US and global economy.
I've studied this a bit.
And I know of some
of it, but I don't
think I really understood,
till you went through point
by point, with any clarity how
sick the system has become.
As you say, it's riddled with
a devouring kind of cancer,
the actual economic system.
So let's start out with the
question of imaginary worth,
the empire of debt, and
that real worth cannot be
fabricated, as you
say in the book.
We'll start there.
>>ZEUS: In the introduction
and the conclusion,
I reinforce this,
but I really begin
to explain sort of where
the disease started
in that chapter.
And really, worth is created
by effort, by creativity,
by something you're
bringing into the world
and giving and sharing.
And imaginary worth is created
by taking someone's giving,
multiplying it in
an illusory way,
and convincing other
people that you actually
have given something
yourself, where you yourself
have not created anything.
You haven't produced
anything, but you
said, oh, I'm the capitalist.
I put the money into
buying this idea,
so I am now the controller.
I'm the ruler of this process.
And for some reason, our economy
and people in our economy
bought that.
>>REGINA: Well, we actually
chose to turn a blind eye.
I think we first
were just ignorant.
We didn't understand that anyone
was capable of these practices,
no less our own banking
institutions and government.
I don't think anyone
would have suspected
this is what was going on.
Then we started
learning a little bit.
I think 2008 and the
bailouts of the bank
was kind of the first
hint most people got
that something wasn't
done correctly here
to create this problem.
But no one understood
the full extent of it.
And also when they did,
it was so overwhelming,
and you felt so powerless
in the face of this,
that we then chose collectively
to turn a blind eye.
People just wanted to get
their credit ratings back, get
another house if they
lost their house,
so they didn't have time
to think about this.
Let's talk about this, because
the implications are huge.
>>ZEUS: They are huge, and
a quick comment on that.
I think the reason why people
have turned a blind eye
is because it's so
systematic and overwhelming.
And one of the
things that brought
me to bring this book forward
is to say, don't worry.
It's a lot more simple than
they're making it seem.
It's a lot more clear than
They're using this notion that
it's extraordinarily complex,
and you're just going
to have to trust us,
to keep you from cutting
through what is actually
a fairly simple con game
and a fairly simple disease.
I mean, cancer is
difficult to deal with,
but it's fairly simple
in its inception.
Its cells whose DNAs have
changed and are now reproducing
without any kind of regulation.
And they're creating damage
for the rest of the body
because they're just
taking over the body.
Now what's the response to that?
We can talk about it
because part of it
is the diagnosis,
you know, which
I had in one of
those documents just
to show you how
outrageous it's gotten.
And the other part is now
what can we do about it?
How can we create
alternatives that are healthy
and that challenge it?
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely, so
let's go through the challenges
because you just lay
it out like it is.
OK, so we're starting backward.
This is 1 through 10.
Again, it's called "10 Shocking
Practices of the US and Global
Economy."
Starting with number 10,
loading the national debt
on younger generations who
neither borrowed nor benefited,
that is unethical.
>>ZEUS: Extraordinarily,
I mean, the way
that I put it is, you know,
I have older people talking
about the young people
using their credit cards
and charging them up for a
couple of hundred dollars.
Well, the older generation
has taken out a $19 trillion
credit card, maxed it out
on the younger generation,
and they're the ones
benefiting from it.
The younger
generation had nothing
to do with generating this debt.
They did not benefit
from this debt.
In fact, more debt is
being piled on them
with really extravagant
college costs
and so forth, and then they
have the older generation,
their parents, handing
them the credit card
and going, oh, by the way.
Here's $19 trillion that
I spent which you're
going to have to pay off.
So it's outrageous to the max.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it is.
And not only that,
these poor kids
are struggling to even find a
means of supporting themselves.
It's not the world
that we inherited.
Theirs is a depleted world.
>>ZEUS: Exactly,
and it's depleted
because, much like a cancer,
all of the available resources
are being sucked into
the multiplication
of a particular segment
of the population that
is only interested in expanding
and concentrating wealth
and the results of productivity
in their own lives.
And no healthy system
operates that way.
Healthy systems
always have diversity.
They have exchange.
They have sharing,
in a word, sharing.
And when you have taking
motivating everything,
you always go toward
death, death of a system.
Now death doesn't have
to be a bad thing, right?
Bad systems can
undermine themselves,
but we need a healthy
response to that system.
And right now,
we're in the middle
of recognizing that this is in
no way sustainable or healthy.
So that's what partly motivated
this top 10 most outrageous
list because I want people
to really be able to focus in
on how we got here.
>>REGINA: I totally agree.
I mean, yeah, this is
the unpleasantness of it,
but then we're going to get
into the other part after.
OK, so number nine,
which is rehypothecation,
and it's using the
same collateral
for different transactions.
Tell us what that means
and what would happen if we
tried to do that in our lives.
>>ZEUS: Absolutely, let's
say you had a house,
and you had the ability to
use that house as collateral
to buy 100 houses.
And the banks actually
went for it, right?
So you have every incentive
to make outrageous risks
in a whole bunch of different
housing markets on the hope
that one of them turns up
to have increased its value.
And then you cash
out, and you get.
Now on all the other
houses that you've
used your house as collateral
for, let's say half of them
went down and only
10 of them went up.
Then you can just
sort of default
on all those other ones.
You can default on
your house, which
is the only collateral
you put up with,
and now the banks have to
fight over that collateral.
And it can't pay for nearly
all of the losses that
are generated.
Unfortunately, in
finance that has
been standard practice with
these financial industries.
They will use the
same-- and again, it's
hidden behind these allegedly
complex financial schemes
and derivatives.
But they basically are
using the same collateral.
It's just much like a house.
They might call it
an asset, or they
might say, a small reserve, but
a very small reserve in a bank
account.
And then they will just
simply leverage that and say,
you know, it counts for all
these other investments.
>>REGINA: Right, right,
it should be illegal.
So if we go to the bank, and
we want to, say, take out
a loan for a car,
and maybe they're
looking sideways at you
a bit because you've
had a little ding on your credit
rating somewhere along the way,
then you have to
put up collateral,
something significant
which they will
come and take away from you if
you start missing a payment.
So that's how they
work on our end.
How they work on
their end is just
sort of criminal in that sense.
>>ZEUS: Right, because
they did these practices.
And I don't want to
get ahead of myself,
so I won't get into
the rest of the list.
But they did these practices,
and there were no consequences.
There has not been a
significant investigation,
much less prosecution, of any
significance to any company.
They have a couple of bad
apples that they pulled out,
and even those were very few.
And they had to be ridiculous,
like Bernie Madoff--
no accountability, zero.
And that's what's
causing the outrage,
both in terms of left and
right political spectrum,
across the spectrum.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK, number
eight, fractional reserve, poof,
the magical money multiplier.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, well, a lot
of people don't know this,
but your bank can
basically fabricate money.
All it needs is a
tenth of a reserve,
and it can write loans.
If it has $100,000, it can
write loans for $1 million.
It can basically multiply
its money by a factor of 10--
and it's allowed to
do this-- in order
to, in quotes,
"increase money supply."
But it's not increasing
money supply.
It's increasing debt supply
because it's not real money.
>>REGINA: Exactly, yeah, and
they charge interest on that
money that they--
>>ZEUS: Of course they
do, the funny money.
>>REGINA: --loan out.
And that one, I
think, is the one
that people are most familiar
with, that particular one-- OK,
this one, mark to model or
mark to fantasy accounting.
>>ZEUS: Right, this
is another one.
I mean, again, this is where
this alleged complexity comes
in.
It's a very simple con game.
OK, listen.
If I want to
leverage what I have,
if I want to say I have a
lot of assets, I'm rich,
the way that I talk about it
is if I were like these banks,
I could valuate my
kitty litter box
is a million dollars because my
mathematical models say it is.
>>REGINA: You're creating
the mathematical model.
>>ZEUS: Exactly, and my
created mathematical model
and its circular
logic reinforces
this supposedly independent
valuation of my kitty litter
box.
And what I have in
the book is, you know,
imagine me being
able to do that.
This is mark to fantasy,
or mark to model,
my mathematical model.
And then I take that and
leverage that another 100-fold
or 1,000-fold to buy up a
multi-billion-dollar dollar
company.
And then if I deal with
private equity firms,
then I will just try to
hollow it out and get as much
out of it as I can and then let
it go bankrupt and walk away.
And it's outrageous that,
purely on my say so, I can say,
all those houses out there that
have just got foreclosed upon
are still as high,
maybe even higher,
than they were at the
peak of the market.
And I don't want to come to
terms with taking a loss,
so I simply just say,
I assess it at this.
And that's what it is,
according to our models.
And our portfolio is still
as healthy as it's ever been,
even though it has
no relationship
whatsoever to the market.
And there's no one forcing
them to have any kind
of relationship to the market.
Now I'm sensitive to plunging
prices bringing it well
below its market value,
so I have suggested
something very reasonable.
I've said, bring it to
the inflation index.
In other words, draw
that little dotted
line of where the average
house prices have been,
and then bring it
down to that line.
You know, so then you can't
claim that you've been shorted,
and you're going
well below that.
But they don't do that.
>>REGINA: No, nothing in it
for them, like massive profits,
OK, number six is toxic assets.
>>ZEUS: Right, this
is a special, like,
[GROANING] of mine
because the term,
toxic assets, itself is an
inherently incoherent term.
Nothing that is an
asset can be toxic.
Toxics are 100% liability.
Assets are 100% benefit.
You can't stick
those two together.
So how did we ever come up
with this term, toxic asset,
as a meaningful term?
That's a good question.
I know what it serves
for these people.
It serves to have
these companies deny
their accountability
and responsibility.
>>REGINA: Is it like these toxic
assets just happen to them?
>>ZEUS: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: And that's how
they position it or spin it.
>>ZEUS: I think that's
how they position it.
And then, of course, they
blame it on the little guy.
Oh, these people were
defaulting on their mortgage
so that infected the
mortgage-backed securities
and all the derivatives
that we have.
And now those aren't
worth anything.
And it's really, you
know, the little people
who overextended themselves
that created the problem
and made these toxic.
What happened, though, in
reality, is they leveraged.
They multiplied.
We could have easily paid
off the entire mortgage
of every person in
default in the biggest
default in this country's
history for about $1 trillion.
And instead, we spent
about $12 trillion
bailing these guys
out, $12 trillion.
>>REGINA: That's what
ticks people off.
>>ZEUS: Because they
multiplied them, right?
That toxicity could not have
been created by the little guy.
Otherwise, its maximum
would have been $1 trillion
to buy up every asset.
And you could have still
gotten at least 40%,
50%, 60% out of
that, so it would
have been than less than that.
But because they were
based in real assets,
they have some value, going
back to our original question.
But when you start spinning it
out into its imaginary value,
now you've got
nothing but toxins
being created by
the finance industry
and not taking
responsibility for it.
So this accountability,
explaining
this about toxic
assets, is to say, no.
It isn't you.
The toxins are
not being created,
even by irresponsible borrowing,
you know, hopeful borrowing.
And you're probably going to
have the consequence for that
anyway.
>>REGINA: And explain what
you mean by hopeful borrowing.
>>ZEUS: Well, that's part
of the American ethic.
I mean, it's a part
of the American dream
that I have some problems with,
this notion of aspiration.
And you have a dream,
and you're going
to borrow against just
on a hope and a prayer.
And you want to live
the American dream.
And you want to have that house,
and maybe you don't really
have the money to pay for it.
But, you know, you're
going to get that job.
>>REGINA: Right, that is part
of what it is to be an American,
is to dream the American dream.
>>ZEUS: Right, I'd like to
see that dream more in terms
of community interaction,
building up slowly,
if you want to start a business,
doing some pilot projects,
working out of your home,
learning the business,
being able to develop
it in a sustainable way,
knowing that it's filling an
actual need in the community,
right, rather than
a hope and a prayer.
You can pray all you
want, but it actually
helps something productive.
>>REGINA: You still have to take
the proper steps and action.
There's a process.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, and
so you're going
to see this kind of cropping
up again and again in the book
and in this.
American people have
allowed themselves
to be sold on this mentality
of getting rich quick, so they
have participated--
>>REGINA: Well, we glorify it.
>>ZEUS: We glorify
it, and part of this
is to make us aware of
how we have actually
agreed to some of this stuff.
Now I'm not blaming
the victim here,
but there are ways in
which we bought it.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah, if you can
buy a house that, as you say,
is more than 10 times
your yearly income
on an adjustable rate
mortgage right for 3% or 2%,
that's very tempting.
It's like, oh, my gosh.
I never thought I could have
a house like that, but I can.
And you just kind
of turn a blind eye
to what's going to happen in
three years or five years.
Well, I'm sure
something will happen.
I mean, I guess
we could sell it.
I guess we could sell
it if we get in trouble.
And a lot of people did that.
>>ZEUS: And everyone
was telling them,
these unscrupulous
mortgage lenders.
First of all, they were
having them sign up
for balloon payments, where
it would be low payments,
and then it would step up.
And they were giving loans.
I saw newspaper articles where
people making $45,000 a year
out in California were given
loans for a $745,000 house.
>>REGINA: That's crazy.
>>ZEUS: So we're
talking not even--
3 and 1/2 is what's
normal, 3 and 1/2 times
your yearly salary.
It was going up to 10 and even
exceeding that, all the way up
to almost 20.
And they didn't care
because the mortgage lenders
were going to get their fees.
>>REGINA: Exactly, I assume you
saw the movie "The Big Short."
>>ZEUS: Oh, absolutely.
>>REGINA: A couple times, I
saw it a couple times anyway.
>>ZEUS: It was very well done.
>>REGINA: Very well
done, and I thought
that the way they represented
that element of the crumbling
financial picture was beautiful
when they went to Florida.
And they talked to the guys
that were selling those loans.
And the guys would say, hey.
They don't know any difference.
In fact, we try to get
as many foreign people
on board as possible.
They don't understand the
language all that well.
I mean, it was
really despicable,
and there was no conscience
surrounding it at all.
And, of course, Florida
was one of the first states
to start going belly up.
I mean, the value
of their properties
dropped like a stone.
You could practically get
them for an annual salary.
>>ZEUS: They were
dropping 80%, 90%.
You could.
You could get them for almost
one times your annual salary
at a certain point.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
so anyway, if someone
hasn't seen "The Big Short,"
I think it's definitely worth
watching because it shows the
not hyperactive megalomania,
the psychology behind how
this became the way it did.
And by the way, on
that note for those
who have seen "The
Big Short," what
did you think of the
prime character in it
who was just looking at the
numbers and what he did?
Explain that to the people
so when they go see this film
they're looking at
it through your lens.
>>ZEUS: Well, he's kind of like
an interesting Shakespearean
character.
He's almost like the
narrator of a drama.
He's the guy kind
of behind the scenes
who understands that
the system is rigged,
and he understands
what the consequences
will be if they play out in the
direction that they're going.
>>REGINA: Christian Bale.
>>ZEUS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes, and he's
just about numbers.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, or was it Gosling?
Were you talking
about Gosling, too?
>>REGINA: No, Gosling
is the narrator--
>>ZEUS: OK, that's who I
thought you were talking about.
>>REGINA: No, Christian
Bale, the one who said, whoa.
We're going into a total
mass default on mortgages.
It's in the numbers.
And he was a quirky, Silicon
Valley kind of savant guy.
>>ZEUS: The savant, guy, OK,
right, and what I liked was--
and you don't really pick this
up explicitly in the movie.
But these guys who were
going contrary to--
>>REGINA: The credit
default swaps.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, who were going
contract to this, a lot of them
were activists and
agitators, realizing
that this was really unhealthy.
And they were going
to bet against this
because traditionally in the
financial market, if you bet
against it, you
can create a hedge
against irrational
exuberance, what's
called irrational exuberance,
from this testosterone-fuelled,
like, greed, because there
will be a consequence for it.
But what they realized, I
think, and he did as well,
at the end of the
movie when he realizes.
He put a number up on the board.
They kept losing money.
It was going down, like, 50%.
>>REGINA: And everyone's saying,
you've got to do something.
>>ZEUS: Panicking, and at the
end it was almost like 500%.
I think it was like 496%
or something ridiculous.
>>REGINA: Yeah, something
like that, 469%, something
like that, yeah.
>>ZEUS: Yes, and the other
one, played by Steve Carell,
they all realized though
they had gotten rich,
nothing had changed.
Absolutely nothing had changed.
These banks, they've
gotten away with it all.
The US taxpayers'
money backstopped them.
And their attempts
to correct the system
by betting against
it got them wealthy,
but it really didn't change
the underlying sickness.
>>REGINA: No, and
I bring this up
because it was so
well represented,
I think, toward what
you're speaking of.
Brad Pitt played the role of
a previously very successful
trader who was just
sick of the game.
He got out of the game and
moved to Boulder, Colorado,
grew his own organic vegetables,
you know, and all of that.
And in real life,
Brad Pitt is one
of the actors who has very
publicly come out and said,
that didn't buy me anything.
The fame, the
fortune, everything
I have bought me nothing by
way of happiness in my life.
And he was, I think, also one
of the producers or executive
producer of that film.
>>ZEUS: He was.
He was.
>>REGINA: So he's really trying
to-- he's using his position
to get this message out
that the system is sick.
>>ZEUS: Right, and I think that
that's where we are starting.
I mean, I hope that
when people read
this book and these documents,
which I will make available,
that they will get the notion.
They won't be overwhelmed.
They will be attracted
to the notion
that in very clear and
concise and simple terms
they have been able
to diagnose what's
at the heart of this sickness.
And that's why I liked
the film, because it
did a very personal,
well-edited job of getting
to the core of it.
And that's the first step
in making a healthy recovery
and finding alternatives.
>>REGINA: Well, we're not even
done with the sick part yet.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, OK,
let's continue.
>>REGINA: OK,
sovereign governments
paying private central
banks to create money,
we'll kind of go on
through that quickly.
>>ZEUS: Right,
well, that's just--
I mean, the Federal Reserve
people don't understand.
They think it's a
governmental organization.
It's not.
It's a private organization,
and it represents
not the American people.
It represents the biggest
banks in the country.
And people don't know this.
When Hillary Clinton recently
said that the banks paid it
back in one of the debates,
they did not pay anything back.
They were given 0% money
in trillions of dollars,
many hundreds of
billions of dollars,
if not trillions of dollars,
from the Federal Reserve,
which is a private bank.
And they lent it back
to the US government
at 2% to 3% interest.
So the US government and
the American taxpayers
were paying these banks to give
them interest on the free money
that they got.
And so they are able to
get tens, if not hundreds,
of billions of dollars of
interest on that free money
they got to pay us back.
And where did they
get that money?
From us.
>>REGINA: Yes, that was a
really fraudulent statement
on her part, but
she's known to be
in collusion with Wall Street.
>>ZEUS: Well, I mean,
I think that was
the criticism that was brought
up in the Sanders campaign.
When you are payed
enormous fees to speak--
>>REGINA: At least
$15 million thus far.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, your PAC
is receiving $15 million.
You're personally receiving
$600,000 from Goldman Sachs
alone to give three speeches.
You're more than a
little compromised.
>>REGINA: More than a
little compromised, yes, OK,
number four, "complex"
derivatives operating
as vehicles for fraud--
most people can't even
explain what derivatives are.
>>ZEUS: No, but I
like just focusing
on the term, derivative.
Now when we use that in the
common English language,
is that a positive thing
or a negative thing?
Well, if a person is acting,
or their act, or their business
is derivative, we
usually say it's a fake,
or it's an inferior copy.
Or it's just kind of
a wanna be, right?
Well, just think
of that when you
think of financial derivatives,
because it's exactly that.
It's a pale copy,
pumped up as if it was
complex and important and real.
And, you know, you can put
lots of big lingo around it.
But all it's basically
saying is that I'm
going to use real
value, monkey with it
into all these
artificial instruments,
multiply its value in these
artificial instruments way
beyond fractional reserve.
Fractional reserve
multiplies that by 10.
There is no limit to
the multiplication
you can do with derivatives.
You can have bets on bets on
bets, and before you know it
there's this whole link of
essentially false creation.
>>REGINA: The film
also illustrated
that, "The Big Short."
I've never understood it
because there is no logic to it.
>>ZEUS: There is
no logic at all.
>>REGINA: In the real
world, there's no logic.
That doesn't happen
in the real world.
>>ZEUS: Right, and that's
why people sometimes, I
think, turned a blind eye, as
you say, because they're like,
how could that happen?
>>REGINA: Well, I must not be
understanding it correctly--
>>ZEUS: I must not
be understanding.
>>REGINA: --because
it doesn't make sense.
>>ZEUS: You're
telling me that you
can create a completely
imaginary pyramid based
on very little actual value?
>>REGINA: Legally, and
not go to prison for it?
>>ZEUS: And legally?
You know, and the answer
is, yes, unfortunately.
>>REGINA: OK, so number three,
nothing succeeds like failure.
>>ZEUS: Yeah, this is something
that just drives me crazy,
too, lack of accountability.
I noticed this in CEO pay.
If you succeed through this
kind of legal chicanery,
you get a $500-million
golden parachute.
If you fail, you
only get $50 million.
I mean, there are
people who have
lost 90% of the
value of the company,
and they are invited toward
the door, as you would expect.
But in order to give
them an inducement
to leave after really
poor leadership,
they're given $50
million, $40 million.
So here you have it, where
the worst you can do,
by completely tanking the
company, is to get $50 million
in your personal bank account.
And the best you
can do, you know,
either legitimately
or illegitimately,
is you get $500 million.
You've got every incentive
to be completely unwise
and to just go for
the highest you can
because even if you
crash to the ground,
you've still made a haul.
>>REGINA: Absolutely
no accountability.
>>ZEUS: None.
>>REGINA: Financial
crime is the best way
to maximize profit, number two.
>>ZEUS: Well, and
this is the thing that
runs throughout my book, this
is what's really dangerous here.
Fraud is, by far, the
most profitable activity
in the United States
of America right now.
Just let that sink in.
>>REGINA: Do you care
to expand on that?
>>ZEUS: Yes, we have
shown in the way
that we have addressed
and followed up
the collapse of 2008 that
nobody, no matter how
outrageous their betting,
will actually go to jail,
will actually have to pay
back any more than pennies
on the dollar.
All these $5 billion and
$200 million civil penalties
that these big banks
are paying, they're just
a drop in the bucket
from the trillions
that they have raked in
or the trillions they've
been backstopped by the US
taxpayer, world taxpayers
in other countries as well.
And they have not even
had to admit wrongdoing
in these civil cases.
So if that's the
worst that's going
to happen-- no jail time, no
investigation, no prosecution,
pennies on the dollar, and
no admission of wrongdoing--
if that's the worst
you're going to get,
you are incentivizing
massive fraud
because what happens
is the payoff for fraud
is far greater than
any other investment,
by far, 10, 100 times greater
than gold or housing market,
even at its peak.
So what you're saying
is, you can't lose.
And you can win much more
than the rest of them,
so that's going to be
the new business model.
And it is.
The bigger banks are even
bigger than they were before.
They're even more fraudulent
than they were before.
And Obama himself signed a
bill that basically said, now
this gambling is
going to actually
officially be backstopped
by the American taxpayer.
And the text for that
bill was written.
It was taken, and if you
compare it to the industry--
I think it was Goldman
Sachs or JP Morgan,
whatever, or Citibank that
came up with the text of that.
It's exact.
It's the exact same text.
It was literally written by
the industry, put in there,
and signed off.
>>REGINA: That's so depressing.
>>ZEUS: It is.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's
truly depressing.
And yet a mother who's hungry
and steals food from a grocery
store or writes a bad check can
end up with a criminal record,
or even doing jail time.
>>ZEUS: Absolutely,
absolutely, and I
think this sense of
injustice is what's
causing the outrage
in this country
that you're seeing in
the political climate
right now because people,
whether or not they sense it
directly or understand
what's happening directly,
they know something's up.
They know that the crooks
are getting away with murder.
I mean, there are
statistics that
show when the economy tanks
like this the amount of deaths
created like this.
It's astronomical
when you create
these artificial problems,
the depressions, suicides,
you know, health concerns that
go by the wayside that actually
increase.
And so it's not inconsequential.
It's not just about money.
>>REGINA: And
people can't afford
to take care of the
health problem anyway.
>>ZEUS: Exactly, so these
consequences are legion,
and they are deep.
And they are not
just about money.
They're about people's
actual lives, life and death,
and yet there is
no accountability.
>>REGINA: The final one is
fraud closure, as you call it.
>>ZEUS: That is my number
one because it's so clear.
In fraud closure,
here's what happened.
Banks decided they were going
to digitize ownership of homes
because you can't ship them
around and package them
up and go through
all the recording
requirements of transferring
from paper to paper
and paying the fees to
do that, by the way,
and move it as fast as
they needed to move.
And it costs a lot
of money to do.
And so what they did is they
started to digitize ownership,
and they got around.
They didn't follow the
title requirements.
>>REGINA: I know.
Now this is something I've
found interesting for years.
Explain the implications
of that to the homeowner
who has now gone into default.
>>ZEUS: Well, what's
happened a lot of these times
is when these ones that
have gone into default
have asked for the title,
they can't produce it.
>>REGINA: What is the
legal right of the banking
system in that case?
>>ZEUS: Well, a
lot of these judges
are on the side of the banks.
They're trying to force
these citizens, even
without this thing being
produced, to pay up
or to cede ownership of a house.
And it's complicated.
To me, again, this shows you
that even the judicial system
has been caught up in this.
Now some judges have been what
I would call judges of integrity
and said, listen.
If you did illegal
things or improper things
to get to this point,
you need to clear it up
before this goes through.
If you can't produce it at all--
and this is the real problem.
We can't even produce a record
for a lot of these properties.
You know, for a
libertarian or someone
on the more conservative
side, these banks
have ruined the whole
notion of private property
at all in a lot of ways.
>>REGINA: That's true, yeah.
>>ZEUS: So what
they tried to do was
to retroactively
sign title documents
by doing these signature mills.
So they would literally
just have stacks of paper,
and they would hire these
people to sign them,
pretending that
they're representatives
of some legitimate company.
So that's fraud.
That's forgery.
Now, fraud, they're saying,
we can't go after these guys,
even though there are some
outrageous emails that
show there's pure intent.
Well, we can't prove intent,
so we can't prove fraud.
You can prove fraud
when people have forged.
There is no way you
can say, my hand
slipped and I accidentally--
and it's not just one.
Hundreds of thousands
of documents
were done like this,
perhaps even millions.
And what happened
as a result of this?
US government brings all the
states' attorney generals
together for
$25-billion settlements.
Some of them didn't
sign off completely,
said they still reserve
the right to pursue this,
and then it just went away.
They could have nailed them
for every one of those.
>>REGINA: That's what I wonder,
because people were starting
to fight and do these mortgage
forensics and such and say,
proof.
Show us proof.
>>ZEUS: Right, and
there have been
private lawsuits that
have been well researched
that have gone forward.
And I'm planning on
doing an update on this,
and those have been shut
down by the court system.
They had really great
evidence obviously.
And if you had forced these
companies, these banks,
to pay the fines for
each one of these sheets
that they had forged,
they would go bankrupt.
That's how many
there are, and that's
how big the penalties are.
If you had a government that was
interested in true enforcement,
that could be used as leverage
to break up the banks.
>>REGINA: But they're
not going to do that.
And so the average person
just becomes docile and says,
well, I can't do
anything about it.
>>ZEUS: Right, because
they don't have the money
to go through the court system.
And even if they
do, they have judges
that are siding with these
banks, against the law,
against precedent.
And they're like, what can I do?
>>REGINA: That is true.
>>ZEUS: And there's the
practical life aspect, too.
Are you going to
consume your life
in being consumed in this
litigation when you're already
behind the eight
ball financially?
>>REGINA: But some
people just choose
to stay until the sheriff's
department comes and gives them
a 3-day or a 30-day
or whatever notice.
And some people
have been staying
in those homes for years.
>>ZEUS: Yes, yes,
for several years.
>>REGINA: Now what is
your feeling on that?
And if someone were in
that situation, what would
you say to them?
>>ZEUS: Well, I
mean, I don't know.
Certainly a person
who responsibly
pays their mortgage
would say, listen.
Wait a minute.
You're living in
your house for free
after you've been irresponsible,
and I'm paying for my house
while I've been responsible?
So in general, I'd
say, I don't like that.
But here's where
two wrongs almost
do make a right, to
a certain extent.
>>REGINA: No, I totally
get what you're saying,
and I agree with you.
>>ZEUS: Because what
happens is that a house
falls into disrepair, right?
The bank's not going
to sell it anyway
because they don't want
to take the loss on it.
>>REGINA: Now the
lawn's overgrown.
>>ZEUS: Now the
The neighborhood
is being overgrown.
At least they're
mowing the lawn.
paying the taxes,
and they're paying the
utilities on the house.
So it's like, you know,
doing the immoral thing
is still making the better
out of a really bad situation.
The complication,
though, doesn't come out
of these simplistic
moral things.
Someone's responsible.
They're paying.
Someone's irresponsible,
and they don't.
And I would encourage
the listeners or viewers
here not to allow yourself
to be pulled back into that.
Who were the real crooks
here who set this thing up?
Is it the
irresponsible borrowers
who should have known
what they were doing
and failed to pay it off?
Or is it these people
like these mortgage
lenders who were forging,
who were signing and getting
people.
I'll get you into that house.
And then it goes.
>>REGINA: OK, now we're going
to go away from those 10
toxic steps as to how we got
here to the 5 courageous steps
to transform the economy.
And you start with number
one, which is pierce
the fantasy or nail the issue.
Now what do you mean by that?
>>ZEUS: Well, I
think we had talked
about the American dream, and
the American dream and sort
of the false American dream.
The false American
dream is, I can consume
my way into the good life.
If I just play the
game, you know,
I can get a higher paying job.
I can buy more things.
I can go on more
vacations, and that's
what it means to
have a good life.
Well, if that's your
vision of a good life,
you can be compromised
pretty quickly.
People can say, well, you
can have the good life,
and I can give you this loan.
If you don't have the
money now, don't worry.
You'll get it.
Everybody else is doing it.
They're going to Disneyland.
You know, just put it
on your credit card.
Or you can get a
home equity loan out,
and you can have a
good, old, fun time.
So the heart of the
illusion and the issue
is the notion that you can
get something for nothing
and that taking and
consuming is the good life.
It's not.
America is an incredibly
creative country.
It's an inventive country.
Look at all the forms
of music, especially
within the
African-American community,
that have been created here.
Look at all the inventions
that have happened here.
>>REGINA: Even in
the fantastical,
artistic realms,
just Hollywood alone.
>>ZEUS: Exactly, we're
talking the automobile.
We're talking electricity.
We're talking airplane.
We're talking-- it
just goes on and on.
So that's the real
American dream.
The real American dream
is to take our talent
to create and share and give
and find economic mechanisms
and ways of relating
to the community that
allow us to maximize that.
Not financial profit,
maximize creative intensity,
creative connection,
community connection.
And so what we need
to do is we need
to get off the
high-fructose corn
syrup of this
fantasy of consuming
your way into the good life,
which just leaves you morally
obese and morally
sick, and start
generating a notion of giving
and sharing and producing
and connecting as the
driver for the good life.
The nice thing about
a real good life
is it doesn't fit your image.
It comes out of your
growing and creating,
and it develops as you develop.
>>REGINA: Number two is
get real about consequences
so that you can
anticipate the trends.
>>ZEUS: Right, so
let's say you happen
to be one of those people that
bought at the top of a market,
like your house now is worth
a lot less than it was.
And, oh, my stock, I mean, I
should have sold that stock
when it was--
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>ZEUS: And now it's worth half.
It's still a little bit
more than when I bought it,
but I'm waiting for it
to go back up again.
And again, that's part
of that same disease,
trying to maximize what you
can get out of something.
The fact is that
allowing yourself
to be sucked into
that mentality,
you're being sucked into a
scarcity model, where you're
being driven by what you lost.
And you want to get it
back by staying in the game
and continuing to play the game.
What I say in this paper is
you can actually gain more
in terms of quality of life by
admitting it didn't work out,
getting rid of it--
REGINA: So it's not plaguing
you on an emotional level.
ZEUS: So it's not plaguing
you and weighing on you.
And there's something
really sort of
courageous and outrageous
about that action
that's very freeing,
very liberating.
Like, I won't be determined
by the objects around me.
I'm not going to be determined
by the images of wealth
and the good life around me.
I could live on nothing, and
I don't have all that burden
on me.
And our family can learn to
work with other families.
We may even move in with another
family, co-housing, you know,
and share our resources,
reduce our housing
cost which is our highest cost.
Instead of thinking,
oh, well, maybe we
can scrape up enough to get
a slightly smaller house,
why not get more imaginative?
REGINA: You're right.
That's one thing.
The nice thing
about this country,
having so little
history, is that it
allows for the implementation
of whatever we can imagine.
We're not held back by a sense
of what's been done all along.
ZEUS: And that's a
perfect way to look at it.
What will allow you to do
what you have imagined,
to be creative?
To be stuck in the old images
of what wealth and value is
that's hemmed you in
and has you working jobs
you don't like and has you
scraping by, or saying,
wait a minute.
The people who came into this
country came with nothing.
REGINA: Right, that
is true, you know,
with the whole
downturn from 2008.
And I would certainly argue
we're in for another wild ride
here soon.
ZEUS: Oh, yes.
REGINA: Yeah, and
we'll get to that,
is that it was giving people
an opportunity to rethink right
how they choose to live because
we all know that on one level
or another most of us
are slaves to a system.
We know that.
And we know that
you can't stand up
to your boss for fear
of losing your job.
And so you just
accept whatever's
going on in your life because
you have to pay those bills
or you have kids to
support and whatnot.
And so I think most people
understand that pain.
And so with the
economy shredding
as it did, more
or less, it really
gave people a chance
to rethink it.
But other than kids
struggling to find jobs,
young kids, people
who are in their 20s
not being able to
make it, moving back
in with their parents,
I haven't seen
a lot of creativity happening.
ZEUS: No, no, because people
are still trying to eke it.
REGINA: They still think
it's going to recover.
ZEUS: They still think
it's going to recover,
but jobs are contracting through
automation and et cetera.
And these jobs are
not coming back.
All throughout history,
we've gone to another thing.
We've gone agrarian
to industrial,
industrial to information age,
information age to, oh, wait
a minute.
We're getting rid of these jobs,
and they're not coming back.
So we have really got
to be creative about how
we exchange value.
REGINA: Well, and that
gets us into number three.
Stop feeding the beast,
and act on your deeper
values and sense.
ZEUS: Yes, and I think
one of the examples that
resonates with a lot of people--
it might be in that section
there, where I'm like, listen.
How many of you have
a storage locker?
Is this the one that has the
storage locker in it, you know,
where you have your aunt's old
furniture after she's died?
And you're keeping it because
you want to honor her memory.
REGINA: And you're paying $100
a month to keep all this junk.
ZEUS: Yes, and you
know that after a year,
you've already paid up for
the value of everything
in that storage locker.
And yet you're continuing
to keep it around.
REGINA: Yes, and the example
you use up here I thought
was really cute.
It said, if you
cut yourself badly,
you don't worry about
all the blood you've lost
and how to get it back.
You stop the bleeding so you
won't lose any more blood.
And that's kind
of where you say,
we need to assess
ourselves right now.
ZEUS: Right, if something
is hemorrhaging you,
hemorrhaging your bank account,
even something as simple
as a storage locker, stop it.
Stop the bleeding.
How do you stop the bleeding
with a storage locker that
has junk in it
that you never use,
for reasons that aren't
really legitimate?
You're not honoring
your aunt's memory
by keeping something
in a dusty closet
that you're never going to use.
Give it to someone
who can use it.
That's honoring your memory.
And the same is true
of housing costs.
You know, if you're just
laboring under a mortgage,
and you can't really
pay it off, and you're
working two jobs to two and
a half jobs to pay it off,
and it's consuming the life you
could spend with your family
and friends and so forth,
then seriously consider
defaulting on it, well,
not defaulting, per se.
I don't want to be put in
a position of advocating
open default, but look
into your personal options,
into financial options.
And if it makes
sense, you know, you
can do other creative things.
You can have a family
move in with you perhaps,
or you can let go of
the house or downsize.
But the whole thing
is what you want to do
is move from an
unmanageable situation
to a more manageable situation.
You want to stop the bleeding.
REGINA: Otherwise, life is
just a struggle and a burden.
ZEUS: Exactly, if you've
left that cut open,
you're going to become anemic.
It's going to affect
everything in your life.
Maybe it won't kill you, but
you're going to be anemic.
You're not going to
be able to enjoy life.
You're not going to be able
to make healthy connections.
You've got to stop it.
And we have always been taught
about how interesting accrues.
You've got to save
early, and then it's
going to be exponential.
But hardly anyone talks
about cutting your costs.
It has the same effect.
If you cut a cost or
stop the bleeding early,
it's going to have exponential
effects for your future
as well by eliminating
the negatives
and drains on your resources
in very much the same way.
So that's one thing
you don't hear much,
and it's absolutely crucial.
REGINA: Yes, I agree with that.
I do know of one situation
where a woman's parents had
reached retirement age, and
she was living by herself.
And they each had
mortgages, and so they
decided to sell their
individual homes
and then buy a home
that had two master
suites-- it was a
good enough size--
and then just collaborate.
They're from India.
The mother did the
cooking for everybody,
so my friend had fabulous
food around all the time.
She had someone to
watch her dogs when
she wanted to go on
vacation and actually
had a much higher quality of
life as a result of their just
deciding to get creative
and do this together.
But then again, their
culture is more collaborative
and family oriented.
We tend not to see
that as an option
because it's somehow a weakness
or a failure if you're older
and you just haven't
saved enough to make
it work in your elderly years.
Or if you're young and
you haven't made it work,
either way, we're failures if
we can't have our own domain.
That's so false, and it's
just so disconnective.
ZEUS: Yes, yes, that's a
different kind of accounting.
That's a life accounting.
And being real with the
numbers of life accounting,
it's creating value.
It's creating quality
of life because now you
don't have to hire and
do everything yourself.
You actually have help.
REGINA: It worked way
better for both of them.
ZEUS: Of course, it does.
And the millennials
are getting this.
They're forced into it, but
they're starting to do this.
REGINA: As long as they're not
smoking weed in the basement
and playing video games, which
a lot of them kids do do.
I mean, you've got to stand up
and still offer what you have,
whatever your skills,
talents, gifts, passions are.
ZEUS: Right, and I have talked
to you about this earlier.
I'm passionate about big
helping millennials get together
to realize that they can work
better together than simply
going back to their
parents' basement
and addressing in a social
entrepreneurial way community
needs and working with
schools to get them
outside of the building and get
them to do applied knowledge.
You know, so that education
comes back around again.
REGINA: It does.
I mean, the thing is we're
working our way through this,
but you have an equal
amount of lucidity
on the subject of education.
And at the very
end, we'll talk just
for a minute about another
passion that you have
and what you're trying
to contribute to kids
who appear to be challenged.
OK, so finally we
have step number four,
confront your habits
and then start
transforming your
actual character.
ZEUS: Now this is one of
the most difficult steps
for an American because
Americans' identity,
they build their
identity like a suit.
And we all kind of
agree to that identity.
You go to LA, and
you can see that.
Everyone wants to be a
star, and everyone kind of
has to agree to that game.
So you spend more
money than you have.
You have this nice
car and so forth.
And yet at the same
time, in LA people
have stopped as I'm
crossing a street
or stopped to allow me
to go across the street.
You know, so it's this odd
mix that I like of aspiration
mixed with materialism.
I'm not so keen on
that, but I realize
it's part of the
American character,
and then mixed with
this desire to succeed.
And it's very difficult
for an American
to step back and say
that they're wrong
or this is not
working because it's
like if I let go
of this identity
that I've spent all this
time building up, who am I?
And I want to say, you're the
person creatively adapting.
You're not your mask.
You're not your identity.
You're the one inside
that can throw this off
completely and say, I'm
a creative American.
I can let all of this go and
create a completely different
life if I want to.
REGINA: Absolutely, and
it allows for passion
to flow back in in your
endeavors, which we've lost.
There's no energy left
for any kind of passion,
really, in the
American lifestyle.
ZEUS: Unfortunately, there
isn't, not in this mode.
There are glimmers of
it, but people are timid.
I think that people are
being invited-- this
is the good thing about this.
We're being invited with the
collapse of a system that
has been very inauthentic
and has served us
poorly to step forward in
a positive, healthy way.
The problem again is that
we have to not only confront
the outside aspects of
it, like spending money
that we don't need.
But we have to confront the
inner aspects of it, which
is this step number
four, your character.
It says, what are
my little addictions
and my worries that keep
me going into the game
that I know deep in my
heart is completely over?
It's done.
It's bankrupt.
REGINA: It's killing
me, right, yeah.
ZEUS: It's killing me.
And to have not only
the courage individually
but together to get outside of
that classic American isolated
individualism and to start
to speak up and have courage
because when you do that,
then the other people go, oh.
I'm not the only one
thinking this way.
And before you know
it, you can start
creating discussion
groups, groups
where you decide maybe you're
going to go in together
to buy larger lots of food
and spend less money on that
and maybe even start a
co-op as a result of that.
So these are the
kinds of things that
will allow the American
creativity to come together.
This community, getting outside
of the isolated individualism
is to not identify yourself
with your mask of your identity,
with your dream.
Your dream is something
that's continual.
It's creative.
It's not a caricature.
It's not a cartoon.
It's not an image.
And that's what we
have to get away from.
Because we're are so wrapped
up with reality television
and stuff about image, we
need to break that habit.
REGINA: I agree with that.
And it's interesting because
what you're talking about,
all of this again,
if you weren't
looking at it in these bit-sized
pieces, seems overwhelming.
But when you put this
together, you see,
gee, the problem actually you
can see is relatively systemic.
And it's sick, but
it's relatively easy
to understand the way
you break it down.
And the solutions
are too, but it
does require an accounting
of one's own life.
And the way you've
put this together, you
say you're going to make
these documents available?
ZEUS: Yeah, sure.
REGINA: That's great
because it really
does give a focal point for
people to gather together,
whether it's a family
or, again, a community,
or a group of young
people who really
are trying to figure
out, how are we going
to make the rent, you know?
The last one is liberate
yourself and get proactive.
ZEUS: Right, and that's it.
Again, this is a
joyful endeavor.
I think that a large part
of what's keeping people
from taking this not so
radical but actually quite
joyous step of stopping
what's not working, inside
and outside, and moving
into the creative realm
is this notion
that, one, they're
going to lose something.
Or, two, it's going
to be too risky.
Like, it's going to be
riskier than having nothing?
REGINA: Riskier than what
they're already doing?
ZEUS: And being
miserable having nothing?
I've told young people.
I've said, there's
never been a better time
to be who you are
because even selling out
is not paying anymore.
You could sell out to
become that lawyer.
Now you have $400,000 of debt,
and you don't have a job.
You did the responsible thing,
and it's not working either.
REGINA: I love it,
even when selling out
doesn't make a profit.
ZEUS: Yes, so I wanted to say,
you're not losing anything.
You're facing the realities of
the world in which the selling
out actually ends up making
you worse off than actually
following your own passion.
You're in less debt.
You're doing something
at least you care about,
and you're not being
abused and mistreated
by organizations or
corporations that
want to take every last
dime out of your hide
and every last sweat out
of you to make profit
and to ship it off to the 1%.
So before there was
at least a bargain
to be made with the devil.
There isn't that
bargain anymore.
REGINA: We already did that.
ZEUS: We've already
done that, and that's
what got us in this
place in the first place.
So I really want to emphasize
that this is a step of joy.
It's not admitting failure.
It's almost like a
humorous acknowledgement.
It's all gone downhill.
Even selling out
has gone downhill.
And to have that kind
of good American humor
and good global
humor to say, OK,
especially if you're in
the younger generation,
let's get inventive.
REGINA: It's all an experiment.
This is how that one went.
ZEUS: It's an
experiment, and then
start using some of the
material in the book.
Start developing some
of your own experiments
to see what can actually
increase your quality of life
and actually decrease the cost.
And pool your resources.
REGINA: And draw back your
energy for, as you say,
where you really
choose to use it for.
ZEUS: Right, and
it will accelerate
the downfall of the
sickness because once
you withdraw your energy
away from the sickness,
then it doesn't have
anything to go on.
It starts to consume itself.
REGINA: Yeah, it has no food.
ZEUS: It has no food.
So it's almost a
moral obligation
to do that as well as
a personal opportunity
and a communal opportunity.
REGINA: And so with what's
coming up economically, I mean,
we hear various forecasts at
the beginning of the year.
And I pay attention.
You pay attention to probably
some of the same people.
Let's use 2007-2008
as an example.
What's it look
like for 2016-2017?
What's coming up?
ZEUS: Well, my book has
been very, very accurate.
I'm going to do
an update on this,
but there's really
not much to update.
In this, I made these comments
like, the fundamentals will not
be followed.
The interests of
the hyper-wealthy
will continue to predominate
over the general interest,
and these things
have begun to happen.
And what's happened
is the bigger banks
have gotten even bigger.
So the problems that
gave rise to 2008
have increased behind the
scenes, and people can feel it.
They are struggling
more and more.
They have hollowed out
their retirement accounts,
gotten into greater debt to
finance even a minimal life,
even a contracted or
lowered lifestyle.
And it's still not adequate.
And jobs are now
shrinking because they're
being automated and
so forth, and the jobs
that are being put
into the economy
are half the salary or less.
They're lower-level service jobs
or part time with no benefits
and so forth.
So this, again,
is going to build.
Before, I thought-- that's why
I tried to get this book out.
I was thinking,
2014, maybe 2016.
What I found is that
the technologies
for pushing off the
consciousness and reckoning
are well developed.
The American people
have allowed themselves
to be pulled into it
because they don't
want the reckoning either.
A part of them doesn't,
but it can't last forever.
When it comes, it's going
to be worse than 2008.
I do think it's
probably going to come
within this presidential
term, from 2016 to 2020.
Honestly, looking
at the trends, I
don't see it going beyond 2020.
There's just too much happening.
Baby boomers retiring,
they're going to drop,
need much more medical
care, and so forth.
So there are going to be
stresses on the system.
Young people, they're
sitting around,
waiting for jobs that
are not materializing.
And also they themselves are
pushing for accountability.
You saw this in the tremendous
support of Bernie Sanders.
They're looking for a way to--
they're saying, wait a minute.
We're not going to
accept this rigged game.
We're going to get involved--
politically, culturally,
and socially in
our communities--
with meeting these needs
that are not being met.
So that's both positive
and creating a resistance
to business as usual that
these things come around.
Now I'm not advocating
any particular candidate.
So I don't want to be
juxtaposing candidates.
But what I am
advocating for is a way
of going forward into the
future in which we are clear
of what the possible
creative possibilities are
and where the real
damage is happening.
And again, coming
up to the housing
market when people are saying,
who could have known, I did.
I wrote about it.
And look at it.
You have houses in the Bay Area
that are three times the rent.
For the same house, you
are paying a mortgage
that is three times
what you would pay
for that same house in rent.
That cannot continue.
It is so skewed.
And the only thing that would
not allow a person to say this
is going to collapse
sooner rather
than later is to just
delude yourself and say, oh.
The market's just
going to go up.
REGINA: One little
glimmer of hope
which we see on television,
some of the good side of media,
is the notion of these
little mini homes
where people have their own
little, tiny domains for just
really maybe several
thousand dollars.
A lot of people look at
it, and their heart opens.
It's like, that's so appealing.
Talk about that for just a sec.
ZEUS: I think-- and I
do want to leave people
with a very hopeful note.
I am a very hopeful
person in this.
Even as the system collapses,
I don't see that as a tragedy.
REGINA: No, I don't either.
ZEUS: I see it as the opening
to the kind of simplicity,
community action
and interaction.
Tiny homes is a great example.
What are the quality
of life things
that are brought in by
a tiny home, intimacy
being one of them?
You know, in the
old system, oh, I
want to stay away from somebody.
I want my distance.
But these huge McMansions
are creating situations
where families don't
even know each other.
They're watching TV, and
they're doing things separately.
With these tiny
homes, you're actively
participating together.
You're making meals together.
You have to fold the table
up to get your bed out,
or whatever it happens to be.
And as we begin to
understand that this
is where real quality of lies
in connection, in sharing
and giving, and also giving
to future generations,
tiny homes are making
the expense and footprint
that we have for future
generations much less.
So we're loving and sharing
people that haven't even
been born yet.
And this awakens
something in us.
You say, you're
buying back our soul.
This is awakening the spirit.
It's awakening the soul.
It's showing by your activities
in the world that you get it,
that it's about spirit.
It's about extending that
spirit to other people
and about doing it in these
really inventive ways,
like these tiny homes or
local currency or farmers
markets or urban gardening.
Oh, my gosh--
REGINA: All stuff we love.
ZEUS: Yes, exactly, we love
doing this, so let's do it.
REGINA: We need to assess
what our own true values are
and look at where we can
start conserving and buy back
our souls.
ZEUS: Oh, I love that.
I love that.
Buy back our souls.
REGINA: Yeah, buy back
our souls, meanwhile we'll
have you on for
another conversation
down the road on education
because your thoughts on it
are as clear and lucid
and as transformative,
destructive of the old system,
as your thoughts on this.
So again, I thank you
for your clear thinking.
Thank you for being here.
I think what Zeus
has to say is nothing
short of a call to
action to actually give
a damn once again.
You can order a copy of his
book through major booksellers
and start digging deep
inside your own heart.
Let's see what we're
willing to release
to have a more beautiful
and satisfying future.
What are we willing to do?
Until next time, thank you
for joining us here at Gaia.
[THEME MUSIC]